---
layout: page
title: Data Tidying 2
weight: 5
---

> "Tidy datasets are all alike but every messy dataset is messy in its
> own way." â€“ Hadley Wickham

Data science, at its heart, is a computer programming exercise. Data
scientists use computers to store, transform, visualize, and model their
data. As a result, every data science project begins with the same task:
you must prepare your data to use it with a computer. In the wild, data
sets come in many different formats, but each computer program expects
your data to be organized in a predetermined way, which may vary from
program to program.

In this book, we will use R to do data science. R is an excellent
language for data science because with R you can do everything from
collect your data (from the web or a database), to transform it,
visualize it, explore it, model it, and run statistical tests on it. You
can also use R to report your results when you are finished, and you can
run R interactively, as if you were operating a calculator and not
writing computer code. Best of all, R is free.

In this chapter, you will learn the best way to organize your data for
R, a task that I call data tidying. The chapter explains how to change
the format, or layout, of tabular data. To learn how to use different
file formats with R, see Appendix B: Data Sources.

Outline
-------

In *Section 2.1*, you will learn how the features of R determine the
best layout for your data. This section introduces "tidy data," a way to
organize your data that works particularly well with R.

*Section 2.2* teaches the basic method for making untidy data tidy. In
this section, you will learn how to reorganize the values in your data
set with the the `gather()` and `spread()` functions of the `tidyr`
package.

*Section 2.3* explains how to split apart and combine values in your
data set to make it easier to access variables.

*Section 2.4* concludes the chapter, combining everything you've learned
about `tidyr` to tidy a real data set on tuberculosis rates collected by
the *World Health Organization*.

Prerequisites
-------------

You will need to have R installed on your computer to run the code in
this chapter, as well as the RStudio IDE, a free program that makes it
easier to use R. You can learn how to install both in *Appendix A:
Getting Started*.

You will also need to install the `tidyr`, `devtools`, and `DSR`
packages. To install, `tidyr` and `devtools`, open RStudio and run the
command

    install.packages(c("tidyr", "devtools"))

`DSR` is a collection of data sets that I have assembled for this book
and saved online as a github repository
([github.com/garrettgman/DSR](http://github.com/garrettgman/DSR)). To
install `DSR`, run the command

    devtools::install_github("garrettgman/DSR")

2.1 Tidy data
-------------

You can organize tabular data in many ways. For example, the data sets
below show the same data organized into four different layouts. You can
access the data sets in the `DSR` package.

    library(DSR)
    table1

    ##       country year  cases population
    ## 1 Afghanistan 1999    745   19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan 2000   2666   20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan 2001   4639   21347782
    ## 4      Brazil 1999  37737  172006362
    ## 5      Brazil 2000  80488  174504898
    ## 6      Brazil 2001  37491  176968205
    ## 7       China 1999 212258 1272915272
    ## 8       China 2000 213766 1280428583
    ## 9       China 2001 212766 1287890449

    table2

    ##        country year        key      value
    ## 1  Afghanistan 1999      cases        745
    ## 2  Afghanistan 1999 population   19987071
    ## 3  Afghanistan 2000      cases       2666
    ## 4  Afghanistan 2000 population   20595360
    ## 5  Afghanistan 2001      cases       4639
    ## 6  Afghanistan 2001 population   21347782
    ## 7       Brazil 1999      cases      37737
    ## 8       Brazil 1999 population  172006362
    ## 9       Brazil 2000      cases      80488
    ## 10      Brazil 2000 population  174504898
    ## 11      Brazil 2001      cases      37491
    ## 12      Brazil 2001 population  176968205
    ## 13       China 1999      cases     212258
    ## 14       China 1999 population 1272915272
    ## 15       China 2000      cases     213766
    ## 16       China 2000 population 1280428583
    ## 17       China 2001      cases     212766
    ## 18       China 2001 population 1287890449

    table3

    ##       country year              rate
    ## 1 Afghanistan 1999      745/19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan 2000     2666/20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan 2001     4639/21347782
    ## 4      Brazil 1999   37737/172006362
    ## 5      Brazil 2000   80488/174504898
    ## 6      Brazil 2001   37491/176968205
    ## 7       China 1999 212258/1272915272
    ## 8       China 2000 213766/1280428583
    ## 9       China 2001 212766/1287890449

The last data set is a collection of two tables.

    table4  # cases

    ##       country   1999   2000   2001
    ## 1 Afghanistan    745   2666   4639
    ## 2      Brazil  37737  80488  37491
    ## 3       China 212258 213766 212766

    table5  # population

    ##       country       1999       2000       2001
    ## 1 Afghanistan   19987071   20595360   21347782
    ## 2      Brazil  172006362  174504898  176968205
    ## 3       China 1272915272 1280428583 1287890449

Each data set shows the same values of four variables *country*, *year*,
*population*, and *cases*, but each data set uses a different layout .

You might think that these data sets are interchangeable since they
display the same information, but one data set will be much easier to
work with in R than the others.

Why should this be?

R follows a set of conventions that makes one layout of tabular data
much easier to work with than any other. Your data will be easier to
work with in R if it follows three rules

1.  Each variable in the data set is placed in its own column
2.  Each observation in the data set is placed in its own row
3.  Each value is placed in its own cell\*

Data that satisfies these rules is known as *tidy data*. Notice that
`table1` is tidy data.

[TIDY LAYOUT] ![](images/blank.png)

Tidy data builds on an unstated premise of data science that *data sets
contain both values and relationships*. Tidy data displays the
relationships in a data set as consistently as it displays the values in
a data set.

Tidy data works well with R because R is a *vectorized programming
language*. This means that R is designed to work with vectors, one
dimensional groups of elements. Each data structure in R is built from
one or two types of vectors. In R, a vector can be an

1.  *Atomic vector* - a sequence of elements that each have the same
    data type. For example, an atomic vector can be a group of integers,
    a group of doubles (numerics), a group of character strings, or a
    group of logical vectors. In R, scalars (single numbers) are saved
    as atomic vectors of length one.

2.  *List* - a sequence of elements that can each be a different data
    type. An element of a list can even be another list or atomic
    vector.

R stores tabular data as a data frame, a list of atomic vectors arranged
to look like a table. Each column in the table is an atomic vector in
the list.

[STRUCTURE OF A DATA FRAME] ![](images/blank.png)

This structure parallels the structure of data in a tidy data set.
Recall that each data set is a collection of values associated with a
variable and an observation. In tidy data, each variable is assigned to
its own column, i.e., its own vector in the list. As a result, you can
extract easily the values of a variable in a tidy data set with R's list
syntax,

    table1$cases

    ## [1]    745   2666   4639  37737  80488  37491 212258 213766 212766

R will return the values as an atomic vector, one of the most versatile
data structures in R. Many functions in R are written to take atomic
vectors as input, as are R's mathematical operators. So, for example,
you can extract and manipulate the values of variables in tidy data with
concise, simple code.

    mean(table1$cases)

    ## [1] 89172.89

    table1$cases / table1$population * 10000

    ## [1] 0.372741 1.294466 2.173059 2.193930 4.612363 2.118516 1.667495 1.669488
    ## [9] 1.652050

Tidy data also takes advantage of R's vectorized operations. When you
compute an operation between vectors, R will execute the operation in
element-wise fashion: R will perform the operation with the first
elements of each vector involved. Then R will repeat the operation with
the second elements of each vector involved, and so on until R reaches
the end of the vectors. If one vector is shorter than the others, R will
recycle its values as needed (according to a set of recycling rules).

[FIGURE ELEMENT-WISE OPERATIONS] ![](images/blank.png)

If your data is tidy, element-wise execution will ensure that
observations are preserved across observations. Each value will only be
paired with other values that appear in the same row of the data frame.

Do these small advantages matter in the long run? Yes. Consider what it
would take to do a simple calculation with each of the data sets above.

Assume that in these data sets, cases refers to the number of people
diagnosed with TB per country per year. To calculate the *rate* of TB
cases per country per year (i.e, the number of people per 10,000
diagnosed with TB), you will need to do four operations with the data.
You will need to:

1.  Extract the number of TB cases per country per year
2.  Extract the population per country per year (in the same order as
    above)
3.  Divide cases by population
4.  Multiply by 10000

If you use basic R syntax to do this, your calculations will look like
the code below. If you'd like to brush up on basic R syntax, see
Appendix A: Getting Started.

#### Data set one

[DATA 1 VARS] ![](images/blank.png)

Since `table1` is organized in a tidy fashion, you can calculate the
rate like this,

    # Data set one
    table1$cases / table1$population * 10000

#### Data set two

[DATA 2 VARS] ![](images/blank.png)

Data set two intermingles the values of *population* and *cases* in the
same columns. As a result, you will need to untangle the values whenever
you wish to work with each variable separately.

You'll need to perform an extra step to calculate the rate.

    # Data set two
    case_rows <- c(1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17)
    pop_rows <- c(2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18)
    table2$value[case_rows] / table2$value[pop_rows] * 10000

#### Data set three

[DATA 3 VARS] ![](images/blank.png)

Data set three combines the values of cases and population into the same
cells. It may seem that this would help you calculate the rate, but that
is not so. You will need to separate the population values from the
cases values if you wish to do math with them. This can be done, but not
with "basic" R syntax.

    # Data set three
    # No basic solution

#### Data set four

[DATA 4 & 5 VARS] ![](images/blank.png)

Data set four stores each variable in a different format: as a column, a
set of column names, or a field of cells. As a result, you will need to
work with each variable differently. This makes code written for data
set three hard to generalize. Code that extracts the values of *year*,
`names(table4)[-1]`, cannot be generalized to extract the values of
population, `c(table5$1999, table5$2000, table5$2001)`. Compare this to
data set one. With `table1`, you can use the same code to extract the
values of year, `table1$year`, that you use to extract the values of
population, `table1$population`â€”you only need to change the name of the
variable that you will access.

The organization of data set four is inefficient in a second way as
well. Data set four separates the values of some variables across two
separate tables. This is inconvenient because you will need to extract
information from two different places whenever you want to work with the
data.

After you collect your input, you can calculate the rate.

    # Data set four
    cases <- c(table4$1999, table4$2000, table4$2001) 
    population <- c(table5$1999, table5$2000, table5$2001)
    cases / population * 10000

Data set one is much easier to work with than with data sets two, three,
or four. To work with data sets two, three, and four, you need to take
extra steps, which makes your code harder to write, harder to
understand, and harder to debug.

Keep in mind that this is a trivial calculation with a trivial data set.
The energy you must expend to manage a poor layout will increase with
the size of your data. Extra steps will accumulate over the course of an
analysis and allow errors to creep into your work. You can avoid these
difficulties by converting your data into a tidy format at the start of
your analysis.

The next sections will show you how to transform untidy data sets into
tidy data sets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tidy data was popularized by Hadley Wickham, and it serves as the basis
for many R packages and functions. You can learn more about tidy data by
reading *Tidy Data* a paper written by Hadley Wickham and published in
the Journal of Statistical Software. *Tidy Data* is available online at
[www.jstatsoft.org/v59/i10/paper](http://www.jstatsoft.org/v59/i10/paper).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2.2.2 `spread()` and `gather()`

The `tidyr` package by Hadley Wickham is designed to help you tidy your
data. It contains four functions that alter the layout of tabular data
sets, while preserving the values and relationships contained in the
data sets.

The two most important functions in `tidyr` are `gather()` and
`spread()`. Each relies on the idea of a key value pair.

#### key value pairs

`tidyr` uses the concept of a *key value pair* to make data tidying
concrete.

A key value pair is a simple way to record information. A pair contains
two parts: a *key* that explains what the information describes, and a
*value* that contains the actual information. So for example,

    Password: 0123456789 

would be a key value pair. `0123456789` is the value, and it is
associated with the key `Password`.

Data values form natural key value pairs. The value is the value of the
pair and the variable that the value describes is the key. So for
example, you could decompose `table1` into a group of key value pairs,
but it would cease to be a useful data set because you no longer know
which values belong to the same observation.

    Country: Afghanistan
    Country: Brazil
    Country: China
    Year: 1999
    Year: 2000
    Year: 2001
    Population:
    Population:
    Population:
    Cases: 
    Cases:
    Cases:

Every cell in a table of data contains one half of a key value pair, as
does every column name. In tidy data, each cell will contain a value and
each column name will contain a key, but this doesn't need to be the
case for untidy data. Consider `table2`.

    table2

    ##        country year        key      value
    ## 1  Afghanistan 1999      cases        745
    ## 2  Afghanistan 1999 population   19987071
    ## 3  Afghanistan 2000      cases       2666
    ## 4  Afghanistan 2000 population   20595360
    ## 5  Afghanistan 2001      cases       4639
    ## 6  Afghanistan 2001 population   21347782
    ## 7       Brazil 1999      cases      37737
    ## 8       Brazil 1999 population  172006362
    ## 9       Brazil 2000      cases      80488
    ## 10      Brazil 2000 population  174504898
    ## 11      Brazil 2001      cases      37491
    ## 12      Brazil 2001 population  176968205
    ## 13       China 1999      cases     212258
    ## 14       China 1999 population 1272915272
    ## 15       China 2000      cases     213766
    ## 16       China 2000 population 1280428583
    ## 17       China 2001      cases     212766
    ## 18       China 2001 population 1287890449

In `table2`, the `key` column contains only keys (and not just because
the column is labelled `key`). Conveniently, the `value` column contains
the values associated with those keys.

You can use the `spread()` function to tidy this layout.

#### `spread()`

`spread()` turns a pair of key:value columns into a set of tidy columns.
To use `spread()`, pass it the name of a data frame, then the name of
the key column in the data frame, and then the name of the value column.
Pass the column names as they are; do not use quotes.

To tidy `table2`, you would pass `spread()` the `key` column and then
the `value` column.

    table2

    ##        country year        key      value
    ## 1  Afghanistan 1999      cases        745
    ## 2  Afghanistan 1999 population   19987071
    ## 3  Afghanistan 2000      cases       2666
    ## 4  Afghanistan 2000 population   20595360
    ## 5  Afghanistan 2001      cases       4639
    ## 6  Afghanistan 2001 population   21347782
    ## 7       Brazil 1999      cases      37737
    ## 8       Brazil 1999 population  172006362
    ## 9       Brazil 2000      cases      80488
    ## 10      Brazil 2000 population  174504898
    ## 11      Brazil 2001      cases      37491
    ## 12      Brazil 2001 population  176968205
    ## 13       China 1999      cases     212258
    ## 14       China 1999 population 1272915272
    ## 15       China 2000      cases     213766
    ## 16       China 2000 population 1280428583
    ## 17       China 2001      cases     212766
    ## 18       China 2001 population 1287890449

    library(tidyr)
    spread(table2, key, value)

    ## Source: local data frame [9 x 4]
    ## 
    ##       country year  cases population
    ## 1 Afghanistan 1999    745   19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan 2000   2666   20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan 2001   4639   21347782
    ## 4      Brazil 1999  37737  172006362
    ## 5      Brazil 2000  80488  174504898
    ## 6      Brazil 2001  37491  176968205
    ## 7       China 1999 212258 1272915272
    ## 8       China 2000 213766 1280428583
    ## 9       China 2001 212766 1287890449

`spread()` returns a copy of your data set that has had the key and
value columns removed. In their place, `spread()` adds a new column for
each unique value of the key column. These unique values will form the
column names of the new columns. `spread()` distributes the cells of the
former value column across the cells of the new columns and truncates
any non-key, non-value columns in a way that prevents duplication.

You can see that `spread()` maintains each of the relationships
expressed in the original data set. The output contains the four
original variables, *country*, *year*, *population*, and *cases*.

[SPREAD VARS] ![](images/blank.png)

And the values of these variables are grouped according to the orginal
observations, but now the layout of these relationships is tidy.

[SPREAD OBS] ![](images/blank.png)

`spread()` takes three optional arguments in addition to `data`, `key`,
and `value`:

-   **`fill`** - If the tidy structure creates combinations of variables
    that do not exist in the original data set, `spread()` will place an
    `NA` in the resulting cells. `NA` is R's missing value symbol. You
    can change this behaviour by passing `fill` an alternative value to
    use.

-   **`convert`** - If a value column contains multiple types of data,
    its elements will be saved as a single type, usually character
    strings. As a result, the new columns created by `spread()` will
    also contain character strings. If you set `convert = TRUE`,
    `spread()` will run `type.convert()` on each new column, which will
    convert strings to doubles (numerics), integers, logicals,
    complexes, or factors.

-   **`drop`** - The `drop` argument controls how `spread()` handles
    factors in the key column. If you set `drop = FALSE`, spread will
    keep factor levels that do not appear in the key column, filling in
    the missing combinations with the value of `fill`.

You can think of `spread()` as taking a pair of key value columns and
using them to create a rectangular field of cells. The key values become
the column names of the cells, and the value values become the cells
themselves. The `gather()` function in `tidyr` does the opposite
operation. It takes a field of cells and converts them into a pair of
"key:value" columns.

#### `gather()`

`gather()` collects a set of column names and places them into a single
"key" column. It also collects the cells of those columns and places
them into a single value column. You can use `gather()` to tidy
`table3`.

    table4  # cases

To use `gather()`, pass it the name of a data frame to reshape. Then
pass `gather()` a character string to use for the name of the "key"
column that it will make, as well as a character string to use as the
name of the value column that it will make. Finally, specify which
columns `gather()` should collapse into the key value pair (here with
integer notation).

    gather(table4, "year", "cases", 2:4)

`gather()` returns a copy of the data frame with the specified columns
removed. To this data frame, `gather()` has added two new columns: a
"key" column that contains the former column names of the removed
columns, and a value column that contains the former values of the
removed columns. `gather()` repeats each of the former column names (as
well as each of the original columns) to maintain each combination of
values that appeared in the original data set. `gather()` uses the first
string that you supplied as the name of the new "key" column, and it
uses the second string as the name of the new value column.

I've placed "key" in quotation marks because you will usually use
`gather()` to create tidy data. In this case, the "key" column will
contain values, not keys. The values will only be keys in the sense that
they were formally in the data sets column names, a place where keys
belong.

Just like `spread()`, gather maintains each of the relationships in the
original data set. This time `table3` only contained three variables,
*country*, *year* and *cases*. Each of these appears in the output of
`gather()` in a tidy fashion.

[GATHER VARS] ![](images/blank.png)

`gather()` also maintains each of the observations in the original data
set, organizing them in a tidy fashion.

[GATHER OBS] ![](images/blank.png)

We can use `gather()` to tidy `table4` in a similar fashion.

    table5  # population

    ## Source: local data frame [3 x 4]
    ## 
    ##       country       1999       2000       2001
    ## 1 Afghanistan   19987071   20595360   21347782
    ## 2      Brazil  172006362  174504898  176968205
    ## 3       China 1272915272 1280428583 1287890449

    gather(table5, "year", "population", 2:4)

    ## Source: local data frame [9 x 3]
    ## 
    ##       country year population
    ## 1 Afghanistan 1999   19987071
    ## 2      Brazil 1999  172006362
    ## 3       China 1999 1272915272
    ## 4 Afghanistan 2000   20595360
    ## 5      Brazil 2000  174504898
    ## 6       China 2000 1280428583
    ## 7 Afghanistan 2001   21347782
    ## 8      Brazil 2001  176968205
    ## 9       China 2001 1287890449

In this code, I identified the columns to collapse with a series of
integers. `2:4` describes the second, third, and fourth columns of the
data frame. You can identify the same columns with each of the commands
below.

    gather(table5, "year", "population", c(2, 3, 4))
    gather(table5, "year", "population", -1)

You can also identify columns by name with the notation introduced by
the `select` function in `dplyr`, see Section 3.1.

In Section 3.6, you will learn how to combine two data frames, like the
tidy versions of `table4` and `table5` into a single data frame.

`spread()` and `gather()` are the two most useful tools for reshaping
the layout of your data (and making it tidy). `spread()` takes long data
and makes it wider, and `gather()` takes wide data and makes it longer.
In the next section, you will learn about two functions that complement
`spread()` and `gather()`, `separate()` and `unite()`.

#### `separate()`

`table3` demonstrates a new way for a data set to be untidy. Each
element of the `rate` column combines the values of multiple variables
into a single cell. Here, `rate` is a combination of the *cases* and
*population* variables, an untidy arrangement because the variables do
not appear in their own columns.

    table3

    ## Source: local data frame [9 x 3]
    ## 
    ##       country year              rate
    ## 1 Afghanistan 1999      745/19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan 2000     2666/20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan 2001     4639/21347782
    ## 4      Brazil 1999   37737/172006362
    ## 5      Brazil 2000   80488/174504898
    ## 6      Brazil 2001   37491/176968205
    ## 7       China 1999 212258/1272915272
    ## 8       China 2000 213766/1280428583
    ## 9       China 2001 212766/1287890449

If you want to use the values of *cases* or *population*, you will first
need to separate `rate` into its component parts, a task you can do with
`separate()`. `separate()` turns a single character column into multiple
columns by splitting the values of the column wherever a separator
character appears.

[SEPARATE DIAGRAM] ![](images/blank.png)

To use `separate()` pass separate the name of a data frame to reshape
and the name of a column to separate. Also give `separate()` an `into`
argument, which should be a vector of character strings to use as new
column names. `separate()` will return a copy of the data frame with the
column removed. The previous values of the column will be split across
several columns, one for each name in `into`.

    separate(table3, rate, into = c("cases", "population"))

    ## Source: local data frame [9 x 4]
    ## 
    ##       country year  cases population
    ## 1 Afghanistan 1999    745   19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan 2000   2666   20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan 2001   4639   21347782
    ## 4      Brazil 1999  37737  172006362
    ## 5      Brazil 2000  80488  174504898
    ## 6      Brazil 2001  37491  176968205
    ## 7       China 1999 212258 1272915272
    ## 8       China 2000 213766 1280428583
    ## 9       China 2001 212766 1287890449

By default, `separate()` will split values wherever a non-alphanumeric
character appears. Non-alphanumeric characters are characters that are
neither a number nor a letter. For example, in the code above,
`separate()` split the values of `rate` at the forward slash characters.

If you wish to use a specific character to separate a column, you can
pass the character (as a regular expression) to the `sep` argument of
`separate()`. For example, we could rewrite the code above as

    separate(table3, rate, into = c("cases", "population"), sep = "\/")

See Appendix E to learn more about regular expressions in R.

You can also pass an integer or vector of integers to `sep`.
`separate()` will interpret the integers as positions to split at.
Positive values start at 1 at the far-left of the string; negative value
start at -1 at the far-right of the string. The length of `sep` should
be one less than the number of names in `into`. You can use this
arrangement to separate the last two digits of each year.

    separate(table3, year, into = c("century", "year"), sep = 2)

    ## Source: local data frame [9 x 4]
    ## 
    ##       country century year              rate
    ## 1 Afghanistan      19   99      745/19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan      20   00     2666/20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan      20   01     4639/21347782
    ## 4      Brazil      19   99   37737/172006362
    ## 5      Brazil      20   00   80488/174504898
    ## 6      Brazil      20   01   37491/176968205
    ## 7       China      19   99 212258/1272915272
    ## 8       China      20   00 213766/1280428583
    ## 9       China      20   01 212766/1287890449

You can futher customize `separate()` with the `remove`, `convert`, and
`extra` arguments:

-   **`remove`** - Set `remove = FALSE` to retain the column of values
    that were separated in the final data frame.
-   **`convert`** - By default, `separate()` will return new columns as
    character columns. Set `convert = TRUE` to convert new columns to
    double (numeric), integer, logical, complex, and factor columns with
    `type.convert()`.
-   **`extra`** - `extra` controls what happens when the number of new
    values in a cell does not match the number of new columns in `into`.
    If `extra = error` (the default), `separate()` to return an error.
    If `extra = drop`, `separate()` will drop new values and supply
    `NA`s as necessary to fill the new columns. If `extra = merge`,
    `separate()` will split at most `length(into)` times.

#### `unite()`

You may sometimes want to do the opposite of `separate()`: combine
multiple columns into a single column. Many variables, like dates and
blood pressures are meaningful variables built from a combination of
separate values. For example, dates are a combination of *year*,
*month*, and *day* values, like 2015-01-01; and blood pressures are
fractions made of *systolic pressure* values (the numerator) and
*diastolic pressure* values (the denominator), like 110/80.

If the components of such a variable appear in separate columns, you can
combine them into a character column with `unite()`. Give `unite()` the
name of the data frame to reshape, the name of the new column to create
(as a character string), and the names of the columns to unite.
`unite()` will place an underscore (\_) between values from separate
columns. If you would like to use a different separator, or no separator
at all, pass the separator as a character string to `sep`.

[UNITE DESCRIPTION] ![](images/blank.png)

We can use `unite()` to rejoin the *century* and *year* columns that we
created in the last example.

    table6 <- separate(table3, year, into = c("century", "year"), sep = 2)
    table6

    ## Source: local data frame [9 x 4]
    ## 
    ##       country century year              rate
    ## 1 Afghanistan      19   99      745/19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan      20   00     2666/20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan      20   01     4639/21347782
    ## 4      Brazil      19   99   37737/172006362
    ## 5      Brazil      20   00   80488/174504898
    ## 6      Brazil      20   01   37491/176968205
    ## 7       China      19   99 212258/1272915272
    ## 8       China      20   00 213766/1280428583
    ## 9       China      20   01 212766/1287890449

    unite(table6, "new", century, year, sep = "")

    ## Source: local data frame [9 x 3]
    ## 
    ##       country  new              rate
    ## 1 Afghanistan 1999      745/19987071
    ## 2 Afghanistan 2000     2666/20595360
    ## 3 Afghanistan 2001     4639/21347782
    ## 4      Brazil 1999   37737/172006362
    ## 5      Brazil 2000   80488/174504898
    ## 6      Brazil 2001   37491/176968205
    ## 7       China 1999 212258/1272915272
    ## 8       China 2000 213766/1280428583
    ## 9       China 2001 212766/1287890449

`unite()` returns a copy of the data frame that includes the new column,
but not the columns used to build the new column. If you would like to
retain these columns, add the argument `remove = FALSE`.

You can also use integers or the syntax of the `dplyr::select` to
specify columns to unite in a more concise way. We'll learn about
`select` in Section 3.1.

2.3 Solution
------------

The `who` data set in the `DSR` package contains cases of tuberculosis
(TB) reported between 1995 and 2013 sorted by country, age, and gender.
The data comes in the *2014 World Health Organization Global
Tuberculosis Report*, available for download at
[www.who.int/tb/country/data/download/en/](http://www.who.int/tb/country/data/download/en/).
The data provides a wealth of epidemiological information, but would be
difficult to work with as it is.

To see the data in its raw form, load `DSR` with `library(DSR)` then run

    View(who)

![](images/blank.png) *A subset of the `who` data frame displayed with
`View()`.*

`who` provides a realistic example of tabular data in the wild. It
contains redundant columns, odd variable codes, and many missing values.
In short, `who` is messy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*TIP*

The `View()` function opens a data viewer in the RStudio IDE. Here you
can examine the data set, search for values, and filter the display
based on logical conditions. Notice that the `View()` function begins
with a capital V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The most unique feature of `who` is its coding system. Columns five
through sixty encode four separate pieces of information in their column
names:

1.  The first three letters of each column denote whether the column
    contains new or old cases of TB. In this data set, each column
    contains new cases.

2.  The next two letters describe the variable being measured.
    -   `rel` stands for cases of relapse
    -   `ep` stands for cases of extrapulmonary TB
    -   `sn` stands for cases of pulmonary TB that could not be
        diagnosed by a pulmonary smear (smear negative)
    -   `sp` stands for cases of pulmonary TB that could be diagnosed be
        a pulmonary smear (smear positive)

3.  The sixth letter describes the sex of TB patients. The data set
    groups cases by males (`m`) and females (`f`).

4.  The remaining numbers describe the age group of TB patients. The
    data set groups cases into seven age groups:
    -   `014` patients that are 0 to 14 years old
    -   `1524` patients that are 15 to 24 years old
    -   `2534` patients that are 25 to 34 years old
    -   `3544` patients that are 35 to 44 years old
    -   `4554` patients that are 45 to 54 years old
    -   `5564` patients that are 55 to 64 years old
    -   `65` patients that are 65 years old or older

Notice that the `who` data set is untidy in multiple ways. First, the
data appears to contain values in its column names. We can move the
values into their own column with `gather()`. This will make it easy to
separate the values combined in each code.

    who <- gather(who, "code", "value", 5:60)

[WHO2] ![](images/blank.png)

We can separate the values in each code with two passes of `separate()`.
The first pass will split `new_` from the variable code from the
combined sex and age codes.

    who <- separate(who, code, c("new", "var", "sexage"))

[WHO3] ![](images/blank.png)

The second pass will split `sexage` after the first character to create
a sex column and an age column.

    who <- separate(who, sexage, c("sex", "age"), sep = 1)

[WHO4] ![](images/blank.png)

Finally, we can move the `rel`, `ep`, `sn`, and `sp` keys into their own
column names with `spread()`.

    who <- spread(who, var, value)

[WHO5] ![](images/blank.png)

The `who` data set is now tidy. It is far from sparkling (for example,
it contains several redundant columns), but it will now be much easier
to work with in R. We will continue to work with this new version of
`who` in Section 3.7, where we will remove the redundant columns and
calculate new variables.
